CLDR-19477 Update phases to include Extended Submission (#5723)
unicode-org/cldr: docs/site/translation/getting-started/survey-tool-phases.md

---
title: Survey Tool phases
---

# Survey Tool phases

This page explains the status entry in the top left corner of the [top of the Survey Tool page](https://st.unicode.org)
<!-- TODO: Add image of the different status messages in ST -->
For the latest news about the Survey Tool, see the [Information Hub for Linguists: News][] section.

## Phases

Data collection in the Survey tool for a regular submission cycle has 4 phases:

1. Shakedown
2. General submission
3. Vetting
4. Resolution

## Regular Submission phases

> Locales which are directly managed by the [CLDR TC][] will follow the regular submission process in order to faciliate dicussions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Locales which are directly managed by the [CLDR TC][] will follow the regular submission process in order to facilitate discussions
```

### Survey Tool phase: General Submission

_Make sure your coverage level is set correctly at the top of the page._

For new locales or ones where the goal is to increase the level, it is best to proceed page-by-page starting with the **Core Data** section. At the top of each page you can see the number of items open on the page. Then scan down the page to see all the places where you need to vote (including adding items). Some 

Then please focus on the [Dashboard][] view,

1. Get all **Missing**† items entered
2. Vote for all **Provisional** items (where you haven't already voted)
3. Address any remaining **Errors\***
4. Review the **English Changed** (where the English value changed, but your locale's value didn't. These may need adjustment.)
    - \* Note that if the committee finds systematic errors in data, new tests can be added during the submission period, resulting in new **Errors**.
    - † Among the _**Missing**_ are are new items for translation. (On the [Dashboard][], **New** means winning values that have changed since the last release.)

> If you are working in a sub-locales (such as fr\_CA), coordinate with others on the Forum to work on each section after it is are done in the main locale (fr). That way you avoid additional work and gratuitous differences. See voting for inheritance vs. hard votes in [Survey Tool Guide][]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are working in a sub-locale (such as fr\_CA), coordinate with others on the Forum to work on each section after it is are done in the main locale (fr). That way you avoid additional work and gratuitous differences. See voting for inheritance vs. hard votes in [Survey Tool Guide][]. 
```

### Survey Tool phase: Vetting

> All contributors are encourage to move their focus to the [Dashboard][] view. Also see [Dashboard tip](/translation/getting-started/vetting-view)s to use during Vetting stage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All contributors are encouraged to move their focus to the [Dashboard][] view. Also see [Dashboard tip](/translation/getting-started/vetting-view)s to use during Vetting stage.
```

1. Any [Flagged entries](https://st.unicode.org/cldr-apps/v#flagged///) in your locale may have questions in the Forum from TC members; please add additional information to help the TC resolve them.
    1. To see the Flagged items, click on the **Menu** icon in the upper left corner, under the **Forum** header see **Flagged items**:
2. Open the Dashboard, and resolve all of the Errors, Provisional Items, Disputed items, and finish Reports

>     1. Consider other's opinions, by reviewing the **Disputed** and the **Losing**. See guidelines for handling Disputed and Losing in the [How to handle different Dashboard categories][] section

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. Consider other's opinions by reviewing the **Disputed** and the **Losing**. See guidelines for handling Disputed and Losing in the [How to handle different Dashboard categories][] section
```

3. Review all open Requests and Discussions in the [Forum][], and respond.

### Resolution (Closed to vetters)

> The vetting is done, and further work is being done by the CLDR committee to resolve problems. You should periodically take a couple of minutes to check your [Forum][] to see if there are any questions about language-specific items that came up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The vetting is done and further work is being done by the CLDR committee to resolve problems. You should periodically take a couple of minutes to check your [Forum][] to see if there are any questions about language-specific items that come up.
```

## Special Survey Tool phases

It is possible for the Survey Tool to be open for some locales and not others. See below for more information.

### Mixed Phases

> It is possible for the Survey Tool to be open for some locales and not others. In this case, you may see a mixed status such as `VETTING_CLOSED/SUBMIT` if you have not selected a locale yet. Login and choose a specific locale to see the status for that locale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible for the Survey Tool to be open for some locales and not others. In this case, you may see a mixed status such as `VETTING_CLOSED/SUBMIT` if you have not selected a locale yet. Log in and choose a specific locale to see the status for that locale.
```

### Survey Tool phase: Extended Submission

The Extended Submission phase was created to support the [non-TC locales][] that are managed by the [DDL WG][].

> The longer submission period to allow smaller organizations to submit data on a more flexible timeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The longer submission period allows smaller organizations to submit data on a more flexible timeline.
```

Locales in Extended Submission often begins earlier than [General Submission][] and may stay in a SUBMIT type phase

> while TC-locales move on to the [Vetting][] and [Resolution][] phases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
even after TC-locales move on to the [Vetting][] and [Resolution][] phases.
```

> while TC-locales move on to the [Vetting][] and [Resolution][] phases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
while TC-locales move on to the [Vetting][] and [Resolution][] phases. The Extended Submission for a major release may even be open before the previous version of CLDR has been released.
```

> Which locales are eligible for Extended Submission may change in the future if multiple organizations are vetting a specific locale

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The locales that are eligible for Extended Submission may change in the future. 
```

> and it becomes important for them to collaborate in the Survey Tool to discuss in the [Forum][] in order to resolve Disputed items.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It may be that multiple organizations start contributing to a locale and it becomes important for them to collaborate in the [Forum][] to resolve Disputed items.
```

> and it becomes important for them to collaborate in the Survey Tool to discuss in the [Forum][] in order to resolve Disputed items.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Which locales are eligible for Extended Submission may change in the future. For example:
* A locale may move to Extended Submission when multiple organizations are vetting a specific locale
and it becomes important for them to collaborate in the Survey Tool to discuss in the [Forum][] in order to resolve Disputed items.
```

> ## Full vs. Limited Submission releases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Regular vs. Limited-submission releases
```

> There are two types of releases: full, and limited-submission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two types of releases: regular-submission and limited-submission.
```

> There are two types of releases: full, and limited-submission.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two types of releases: full, and limited-submission.
(Each of these releases may also include changes to locales that use Extended Submission.)
```
It is switching to talking about releases, rather than types of submission, so we should clarify a bit. Also the text below has three kinds, so suggesting some text there.

Reviewer 2: We are using sometimes "full" and sometimes "regular"

> - Regular-submission:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Regular-submission release
```

>     - Typically with the even versions (e.g. Version 36).

Reviewer: Well that just became outdated...

    - All languages and data areas are open for contributions. 

> - Limited-submission

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Limited-submission release
```

>     - Typically with odd versions (e.g. version 37).

Reviewer: Outdated here too

>     - Selected fields are open for all locales; the voting options will be grayed out for those data points that are not in scope.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Selected fields are open for all locales; the voting options will be grayed out for the data points not in scope.
```

Reviewer 2: SIDE ISSUE: We don't typically use "data point" for "thing that you vote on". We usually have 
- item
- field
- row
- maybe others

We should settle on consistent terminology.

I asked Gemini for suggestions and got:

### **Suggestions for the Best Term**

Choosing the "best" term depends on whether you are addressing a **vetter** (the user) or a **developer** (the architecture).

* **Best for Users (Vetters): "Item"**  
  * **Why**: It is the most natural and least technical term. "Voted on an item" is clearer than "voted on a row" (which describes the UI, not the data) or "voted on a field" (which sounds like a database schema).  
* **Best for UI/Technical Documentation: "Row"**  
  * **Why**: Since the Survey Tool is inherently a table-based interface, "row" provides a clear spatial reference for where the voting action occurs.  
* **A "New" Suggestion: "Entry"**  
  * **Why**: An "entry" bridges the gap between a technical "row" and a conceptual "item." It implies something that has been entered into the system for consideration, which fits the voting mental model well.

We might also consider other terms, or even constructed terms specific to us ("votum" anyone)?

Reviewer: > ("votum" anyone)?
😑

"item" is probably the best option for most... items. For some, like emoji keywords, we may have to be flexible. But either way that sounds like beyond the scope of this PR.

Reviewer 3: One problem with "item" is that we often use it for two different meanings in ST:

1. path = xpath = row
2. value = candidate item = candidate value

One path typically has multiple values. Translated into "item" language, "One item typically has multiple items".

Would "votum" mean path, or value?

Would "entry" mean path, or value?

Author: I'll create a ST glossary this month and we can define these there (and maybe in the style guide for the site as well)

        - Proceed with Submission (General), but start with the [Dashboard][] and focus on Errors\*, Missing†, Provisional
    - Selected locales are open for votes on all fields.
        - Proceed with Submission (General).
- Extended-submission
    - Similar to Limited-submission, only some locales are open for submission.

>     - Submission often opens earlier, and is often extended to encompass the vetting (and sometimes resolution) period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Submission often opens earlier and is often extended to encompass the vetting (and sometimes resolution) period.
```

>     - Extended submision may occur as part of a Regular or Limited submission release.

Reviewer 2: We don't have Extended Submission **Releases** so we should remove this. I think that the information is covered above (some with my suggestions).
```suggestion
```

Author: I refined this to talk about the different types of submissions instead of releases since we now have 'extended submission' which is a type of limited submission and can overlap either.

### Survey Tool phase: Extended Submission

The Extended Submission phase was created to support the [non-TC locales][] that are managed by the [DDL WG][].
The longer submission period allows smaller organizations to submit data on a more flexible timeline.
Locales in Extended Submission often begins earlier than [General Submission][] and may stay in a SUBMIT type phase
while TC-locales move on to the [Vetting][] and [Resolution][] phases. The Extended Submission for a major release may even be open before the previous version of CLDR has been released.

The locales that are eligible for Extended Submission may change in the future. 
It may be that multiple organizations start contributing to a locale and it becomes important for them to collaborate in the [Forum][] to resolve Disputed items.

## Submission types: Regular, Limited and Extended Submission

There are three types of submission: Regular Submission, Limited Submisison and Extended Submission

### Regular Submission

* The long cycle cycle will always be a regular-submission release.
* All languages and data areas are open for contributions. 
    
### Limited Submission

> * Typically only during the shorter CLDR cycle, if there is a shorter cycle that year. Historially were odd numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Typically only during the shorter CLDR cycle, if there is a shorter cycle that year. Historically were odd numbers.
```

* There are two types of Limited Submission
    1. Selected fields are open for all locales; the voting options will be grayed out for the data items not in scope.
       * Proceed with Submission (General), but start with the [Dashboard][] and focus on Errors\*, Missing†, Provisional
    1. Selected locales are open for votes on all fields.
       * Proceed with Submission (General).
        
> Note: [Extended Submission][] is a type of Limited Submission.
>    * Similar to Limited Submission, only some locales are open for submission during certain periods.
>    * Submission often opens earlier and is often extended to encompass the vetting (and sometimes resolution) period.

> >    * Extended submision may occur as part of a Regular Submission or Limited Submission release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    * Extended submission may occur as part of a Regular Submission or Limited Submission release.
```

The locales that are eligible for Extended Submission may change in the future. 
It may be that multiple organizations start contributing to a locale and it becomes important for them to collaborate in the [Forum][] to resolve Disputed items.

## Submission types: Regular, Limited and Extended Submission

> There are three types of submission: Regular Submission, Limited Submisison and Extended Submission

Reviewer 3: Typo "Submisison"

### Regular Submission

* The long cycle cycle will always be a regular-submission release.
* All languages and data areas are open for contributions. 
    
### Limited Submission

> * Typically only during the shorter CLDR cycle, if there is a shorter cycle that year. Historially were odd numbers.

Reviewer 3: Typo "Historially"
